Anduril User Manual
-------------------

Anduril is an open-source firmware for flashlights, distributed under 
the terms of the GPL v3.  The sources can be obtained here:

  http://tiny.cc/TKAnduril
  https://bazaar.launchpad.net/~toykeeper/flashlight-firmware/trunk/files/head:/ToyKeeper/spaghetti-monster/anduril/


Quick Start
-----------

After putting a battery in the light and tightening the parts together, 
the light should quickly blink once to confirm it has power and is now 
operational.  After that, basic usage is simple:

  - Click to turn the light on or off.
  - Hold the button to change brightness.
  - Release and hold again to change brightness the other way.

That is all the user needs to know for basic use, but there are many 
more modes and features available for people who want more.

Before reading the rest of this manual, it is recommended that users 
look at the Anduril UI diagram(s), which should be provided along with the 
flashlight.


Button presses
--------------

Button presses are abbreviated using a simple notation:

  - 1C: One click.  Press and then quickly release the button.
  - 1H: Hold.  Press the button, but keep holding it.
  - 2C: Two clicks.  Press and release quickly, twice.
  - 2H: Click, hold.  Click two times, but hold the second press.
  - 3C: Three clicks.  Press and release quickly, three times.
  - 3H: Click, click, hold.  Click three times, but hold the final press.

The same pattern is used with higher numbers too.  For example, 10C 
means ten clicks...  and 10H means ten clicks but hold the final press.


Simple UI
---------

By default, the light uses a simple UI.  This is useful if you lend the 
light to someone else, or if you just don't want to bother with any 
crazy disco modes.

Simple UI has all the basic functions needed to work as a flashlight, 
but the minimum and maximum brightness are limited to make it safer, and 
any complex or advanced functions are blocked.

Functions available in Simple UI include:

  - 1C: On / off
  - 1H: Ramp up (or down, if button was released less than a second ago)
  - 2H: If light is on : ramp down
        If light is off: momentary high mode
  - 2C: Double click to go to / from highest safe level
  - 4C: Lockout mode.

Some other modes and functions are available too.  When the light is 
off, these are the options:

  - 3C: Battery check mode.  (displays voltage once, then turns off)
  - 4C: Lockout mode.
  - 10H: Switch to Advanced UI.
  - 15C or more: Version check.

In Lockout mode with Simple UI, there are a few functions:

  - 1H: Momentary moon
  - 2H: Momentary low
  - 4C: Unlock and turn on
  - 4H: Unlock and turn on at low level
  - 5C: Unlock and turn on at high level

To change between Simple UI and Advanced UI, turn the light off and then 
do one of these:

  In Simple UI:
    - 10H: Go to Advanced UI.

  In Advanced UI:
    - 10C: Go to Simple UI.
    - 10H: Configure Simple UI.

If you get lost, or if you want to auto-calibrate the temperature 
sensor, do a factory reset.  The process for this is:

  - Loosen tailcap
  - Hold button
  - Tighten tailcap
  - Keep holding button for about 4s

The light should flicker while getting brighter, then briefly burst to 
full power.  Hold until it reaches full power to do a reset, or let go 
of the button early to abort.

On some lights, like products where the tailcap method is impossible, 
use 13H from Off to do a factory reset.  If this is difficult, try 
counting it like music to make it easier:

  1 2 3 4
  1 2 3 4
  1 2 3 4
  HOLD

Simple UI is enabled after each factory reset.


Advanced UI
-----------

Most of the information below this is for the Advanced UI.  Anything not 
already noted above is blocked in the Simple UI.


Ramping / Stepped Ramping Modes
-------------------------------

Anduril's ramping mode uses a smooth ramp or a stepped ramp, depending 
on which style the user prefers.

Each ramp has its own settings -- floor (lowest level), ceiling (highest 
level), and the stepped ramp can also have a configurable number of 
steps.

Additionally, Simple UI has its own ramp settings for floor, ceiling, 
and number of steps.  The smooth/stepped style is inherited from the 
Advanced UI's ramp.

There are four ways to access ramping mode when the light is off:

  - 1C: Turn on at the memorized brightness.
    (see below for details about what "memorized" means)

  - 1H: Turn on at the floor level.  Let go after the light turns on to 
    stay at the floor level, or keep holding to ramp up.

  - 2C: Turn on at the ceiling level.

  - 2H: Turn on at full power, turn off when released.  (momentary turbo)
        (in Simple UI, this uses the ceiling level instead of turbo)

While the light is on, a few actions are available:

  - 1C: Turn off.
  - 2C: Go to or from the ceiling level.
        (or if already at ceiling, and not in Simple UI, go to/from turbo)
  - 1H: Change brightness (up).  If the button was released less than a 
    second ago, or if it's already at the ceiling, it goes down instead.
  - 2H: Change brightness (down).

  - 3C: Switch to the other ramp style.  (smooth / stepped)
  - 3H: Tint ramping (on lights which have it).
  - 3H: Momentary turbo (on lights with no tint ramping).

  - 4C: Go to lockout mode.

  - 5C: Go to momentary mode.
  - 5H: Start a sunset timer.  Details are below in the Sunset Timer section.

  - 7H: Ramp config menu.
    - Item 1: Floor level.
    - Item 2: Ceiling level.
    - Item 3: Number of steps (except for smooth ramp).

  - 10C: Activate manual memory and save the current brightness.
  - 10H: Manual memory config menu.
    - Item 1: Disable manual memory and go back to automatic memory.
              (doesn't matter what value the user enters at the prompt)
    - Item 2: Configure the manual memory timer.
              Sets the timer to N minutes, where N is the number of 
              clicks.  A value of 0 (no clicks) turns the timer off.

Memory determines which brightness level the light goes to with 1 click 
from off.  There are three types of brightness memory to choose from:

  - Automatic:  Always uses the last-ramped brightness.

  - Manual:  Always uses the user's saved brightness.

  - Hybrid:  Uses the automatic memory brightness if the light was only 
    off for a short time, or resets to the manual memory level if it was 
    off for a longer time.
    The timer for this is configurable from 0 to 255 minutes.

Another way to think of it is:  There are three styles of memory for the 
last-ramped brightness level...

  - Always remember         (automatic)
  - Remember for N minutes  (hybrid)
  - Never remember          (manual)

To choose a memory style, set the configuration accordingly:

  mem type	manual mem	manual mem timer
  --------	----------	----------------
  automatic	off		any
  manual	on		zero
  hybrid	on		non-zero


Sunset Timer
------------

In the ramp mode or candle mode, it's possible to make the light turn 
itself off after a while.

To activate the timer, go to the brightness you want and then use a 5H 
action.  Keep holding the button, and the light should blink once per 
second.  Each blink adds 5 minutes to the timer.

In ramp mode, it slowly dims until it's at the lowest level, then shuts 
off.  In candle mode, it stays at the same brightness until the final 
minute, at which point it dims and dies out.

The user can change the brightness while the timer is active.  If this 
happens during the final few minutes, it also "bumps" the timer up to a 
minimum of 3 minutes.  So if it's getting really dim and you need a 
little more time, you could do a 5H to add 5 minutes, or simply ramp up 
to the desired brightness.


Other Modes
-----------

Anduril has several other modes too.  To access these, press the button 
more than 2 times when the light is off:

  - 3C: Blinky / utility modes, starting with battery check.
  - 3H: Strobe modes, starting with the most recently used strobe.
  - 4C: Lockout mode.
  - 5C: Momentary mode.
  - 7C / 7H: Aux LED configuration.
  - 10H: Simple UI configuration menu.
  - 13H: Factory reset (on some lights).
  - 15C or more: Version check.


Lockout Mode
------------

Click 4 times from Off to enter Lockout mode.  Or 4 times from Ramp.  
This makes the light safe to carry in a pocket or a bag or anywhere else 
the button might be pressed by accident.

To exit lockout mode, click 4 times.  The light should blink briefly and 
then turn on at the memorized level.  Or hold the final press to turn on 
at the floor level instead:

  - 4C: Go to ramp mode (memorized level).
    (uses manual mem level if there is one)

  - 4H: Go to ramp mode (floor level).

  - 5C: Go to ramp mode (ceiling level).

Lockout mode also doubles as a momentary moon mode, so the user can do 
quick tasks without having to unlock the light.  The brightness in 
lockout mode has two levels:

  - 1H: Light up at the lowest floor level.

  - 2H: Light up at the highest floor level.
        (or the manual mem level, if there is one)

It is also possible to make the light lock itself automatically after 
being turned off.  To enable this, go to lockout mode and use a 10H 
action to activate the auto-lock config menu.  Release the button after 
the first blink.  Then at the prompt, click N times to set the auto-lock 
timeout to N minutes.

  - 10H: Auto-lock config menu.  Click N times to set timeout to N minutes.
         A value of zero disables the auto-lock feature.
         So, to turn off auto-lock, don't click at all.

And on lights which have aux LEDs, there may be additional functions:

  - 7C / 7H: Change Lockout Mode's aux LED pattern.  More details on 
    this below, in a separate section.


Blinky / Utility Modes
----------------------

Click 3 times from Off to access Anduril's blinky / utility modes.  This 
always starts at battery check and the user can proceed to other blinky 
modes if Advanced UI is enabled.  The sequence is:

  - Battery check.
  - Temperature check (if light has a temperature sensor).
  - Beacon mode.
  - SOS mode (if enabled).

In all of these modes, some basic actions are available:

  - Click: Turn off.
  - 2 clicks: Next blinky mode.

Additionally, in battery check and temperature check modes:

  - 7H: Go to the voltage config menu or thermal config menu.

In more detail, this is what each blinky / utility mode does:

  Battery check:

     Blinks out the battery voltage per cell.  Full is 4.2V, empty is 
     about 3.0V.  The light blinks the whole-number digit first, pauses, 
     then blinks out the "tenths" digit.  Then a longer pause, and it 
     repeats.
     So for 4.2V, it would be "blink-blink-blink-blink .. blink-blink".

     A "zero" digit is represented by a very quick blink.

     The voltage config menu has one setting:

       1. Voltage correction factor.  This adjusts the battery 
          measurement sensor, allowing the user to add or subtract up to 
          0.30V in 0.05V steps.  Click N times to enter a value:

          1C: -0.30V
          2C: -0.25V
          3C: -0.20V
          4C: -0.15V
          5C: -0.10V
          6C: -0.05V
          7C: default, 0V
          8C: +0.05V
          9C: +0.10V
          10C: +0.15V
          11C: +0.20V
          12C: +0.25V
          13C: +0.30V

  Temperature check:

     Blinks out the current temperature in degrees C.  This number 
     should be pretty close to what a real thermometer says.  If not, it 
     would be a good idea to enter the thermal config menu and calibrate 
     the sensor.  Or let the light settle to room temperature, then use 
     factory reset to auto-calibrate the sensor.

     The thermal config menu has two settings:

     - Current temperature.  Click once per degree C to calibrate the 
       sensor.  For example, if the ambient temperature is 21 C, then 
       click 21 times.

     - Temperature limit.  This sets the maximum temperature the light 
       can reach before it will start doing thermal regulation to keep 
       itself from overheating.  Click once per degree C above 30.  For 
       example, to set the limit to 50 C, click 20 times.  The default 
       is 45 C, and the highest value it will allow is 70 C.

  Beacon mode:

     Blinks at a slow speed.  The light stays on for 100ms, and then 
     stays off until the next blink.  The brightness and the number of 
     seconds between pulses are configurable:

       - Brightness is the user's last-ramped level, so set this in 
         ramping mode before starting beacon mode.

       - Speed is configured by holding the button.  The light should 
         blink once per second while holding the button.  Release it 
         after the desired amount of time has passed, to set a new 
         beacon speed.
         For example, to do a 10-second alpine beacon, hold the button 
         for 10 seconds.

  SOS mode:

    Blinks out a distress signal.  Three short, three long, three short.  
    Repeats until light is turned off or until battery is low.

    The last-ramped brightness in Ramping Mode determines the brightness 
    of SOS Mode.


Strobe / Mood Modes
-------------------

Anduril includes a few extra modes for a variety of purposes:

  - Candle mode
  - Bike flasher
  - Party strobe
  - Tactical strobe
  - Lightning storm mode

Click 3 times from Off to access these, but hold the third click for a 
moment.  Click, click, hold.  The last-used strobe mode is remembered, 
so it will return to whichever one you used last.

In all of these modes, a few actions are available:

  - 1C: Turn off.
  - 2C: Next strobe / mood mode.
  - 1H: Increase brightness, or strobe faster.  (except lightning)
  - 2H: Decrease brightness, or strobe slower.  (except lightning)
  - 5C: Go to momentary mode, for a momentary strobe.
        (this is useful for light painting)

Additionally, candle mode has one more action:

  - 5H: Activate Sunset Timer, and/or add 5 minutes to the timer.

In more detail, here is what each mode does:

  - Candle mode

    Brightness changes randomly in a pattern resembling a candle flame.  
    If a timer is set, it will run until the timer expires, then get 
    dimmer for one minute, then sputter and turn itself off.  Without a 
    timer, candle mode runs until the user turns it off.  Brightness is 
    configurable.

  - Bike flasher

    Runs at a medium level, but stutters to a brighter level once per 
    second.  Designed to be more visible than a normal ramping mode, but 
    otherwise works mostly the same.  Brightness is configurable.

  - Party strobe

    Motion-freezing strobe light.  Can be used to freeze spinning fans 
    and falling water.  Speed is configurable.

  - Tactical strobe

    Disorienting strobe light.  Can be used to irritate people.  Speed 
    is configurable, and the duty cycle is always 33%.

    Be careful about heat in this mode, if using it for a long time.

  - Lightning storm mode

    Flashes at random brightness and random speed to simulate lightning 
    strikes during a busy lightning storm.  Do not look directly at the 
    flashlight when this mode is running, because it may suddenly go to 
    full power without warning.


Momentary Mode
--------------

Click 5 times from Off to enter Momentary mode.  Or 5 times from Ramp, 
or 5 times from a strobe mode.

This locks the flashlight into a single-mode interface where the LEDs 
are only on when the button is held down.  It is intended for Morse 
code, light painting, and other tasks where the light should be on only 
for a short time and probably in a pattern.

Momentary mode does either a steady brightness level or a strobe, 
depending on which was active before going to momentary mode.  To select 
which one, go to the mode you want to use, adjust the brightness and 
speed and other settings, then click 5 times to enter momentary mode.

In steady mode, brightness is the last-ramped level, so adjust that 
before entering momentary mode.

In momentary strobe mode, the settings are copied from the last-used 
strobe mode, such as party strobe, tactical strobe, or lightning.

To exit this mode, physically disconnect power by unscrewing the tailcap 
or battery tube.


Configuration Menus
-------------------

Every config menu has the same interface.  It has one or more options 
the user can configure, and it will go through them in order.  For each 
menu item, the light follows the same pattern:

  - Blink once, then go to a lower brightness.  The user can keep 
    holding the button to skip this menu item, or release the button to 
    dive in and enter a new value.

  - If the user released the button:

    - Stutter or "buzz" quickly between two brightness levels for a few 
      seconds.  This indicates that the user can click one or more times 
      to enter a number.  It will keep buzzing until the user stops 
      clicking, so there is no need to hurry.

After entering a number, or after skipping every menu item, it waits 
until the button is released then exits the menu.  It should return to 
whatever mode the light was in before entering the config menu.


Ramp Config Menu
----------------

While the light is on in a ramping mode, click 7 times (but hold the 
final click) to access the config menu for the current ramp.

Or, to access the ramp config for Simple UI, make sure the Simple UI is 
not active, then do a 10H action from Off.

For smooth ramping mode, there are two menu options:

  1. Floor.  (default = 1/150)
  2. Ceiling.  (default = 120/150)

For the stepped ramping mode, there are three menu options:

  1. Floor.  (default = 20/150)
  2. Ceiling.  (default = 120/150)
  3. Number of steps.  (default = 7)

For the Simple UI mode, there are three menu options.  They are the same 
as stepped ramping mode.

  1. Floor.  (default = 20/150)
  2. Ceiling.  (default = 120/150)
  3. Number of steps.  (default = 5)

Default values are different for each model of flashlight.  The numbers 
above are only examples.

To configure the floor level, click the button equal to the number of 
ramp levels (out of 150) at which the floor should be.  To set the 
lowest possible level, click once.

To configure the ceiling level, each click goes one level lower.  So 1 
click sets the highest possible level, 2 clicks is the 2nd-highest, 3 
clicks is the 3rd-highest level, etc.  To set the default of 120/150, 
click 31 times.

When configuring the number of steps, the value can be anything from 1 
to 150.  A value of 1 is a special case.  It places the step halfway 
between the floor and ceiling levels.


Version Check Mode
------------------

This allows people to see which version of the firmware is installed on 
their light.  The format for this is (usually) 12 digits -- a date 
followed by a model number.  YYYYMMDDBBPP

  - YYYY: Year
  - MM: Month
  - DD: Day
  - BB: Brand ID
  - PP: Product ID

The date is when the firmware was compiled.  If the vendor did not set 
this value, it defaults to 1969-07-20, the date of first human contact 
with the moon.  However, it might not be a date at all; some vendors may 
specify a completely different type of value here.

The brand/product values are also known as the model number.  These are 
hard-coded in the source code for each light's build target, and can be 
looked up in the "MODELS" file or by using the "make models" command.


Protection Features
-------------------

Anduril includes low voltage protection (LVP) and thermal regulation.

LVP makes the light step down to a lower level when the battery is low, 
and if the light is already at the lowest level, it shuts itself off.  
This activates at 2.8V.  LVP adjustments happen suddenly, in large 
steps.

Thermal regulation attempts to keep the light from overheating, and 
otherwise adjusts output to stay as close as possible to the 
user-configured temperature limit.  Thermal adjustments happen 
gradually, in steps so small they are difficult for humans to perceive.


Aux LEDs / Button LEDs
----------------------

Some lights have aux LEDs or button LEDs.  These can be configured to do 
different things while the main emitters are off.  There is one aux LED 
mode for the regular "off" mode, and another aux LED mode for "lockout" 
mode.  This allows the user to see at a glance whether the light is 
locked.

Aux LED modes typically include:

  - Off
  - Low
  - High
  - Blinking

To configure the aux LEDs, go to the mode you want to configure and then 
click the button 7 times.  This should change the aux LEDs to the next 
mode supported on this light.

  - 7C: Next aux LED mode.

If the aux LEDs can change color, there are additional actions to change 
the color.  It is the same as above, but hold the button on the last 
click and then let go when the desired color is reached.

  - 7H: Next aux LED color.

On most lights, the colors follow this sequence:

  - Red
  - Yellow (Red+Green)
  - Green
  - Cyan (Green+Blue)
  - Blue
  - Purple (Blue+Red)
  - White (Red+Green+Blue)
  - Disco (fast random colors)
  - Rainbow (cycles through all colors in order)
  - Voltage (uses color to display battery charge)

In voltage mode, the colors follow the same sequence, in the same order 
as a rainbow...  with red indicating a low battery and purple indicating 
a full battery.

For lights with a button LED, the button LED typically stays on while 
the main emitters are on.  Its brightness level is set in a way which 
mirrors the main LED -- off, low, or high.

For lights with a RGB button LED, the button LED indicates battery 
charge during use in the same manner as the aux LED voltage mode.

For lights with front-facing aux LEDs, the aux LEDs typically stay off 
when the main emitters are on, and when the light is otherwise awake.  
The aux LEDs on most lights only turn on when the light is asleep.


Tint Ramping
------------

Some lights have more than one set of LEDs which can be adjusted to 
change the color temperature of the light.  On these models, there is a 
global button mapping which works at all times unless it's overridden by 
the mode the light is in:

  - 3H: Tint ramping

So, at almost any time, click 3 times but hold the final press, and it 
can change the color of the light.  This is best done with the light at 
a moderately high level, because it makes the changes smooth.  Low 
levels have more coarse resolution and will typically change in very 
visible steps.

At both ends of the tint ramp, there is an "auto tint" mode.  This 
automatically chooses a tint based on the brightness level...  so it can 
be warm white while dim, or cool white while bright.  Or vice-versa.  To 
access this, ramp to the end of the tint range, then keep holding until 
the light blinks a second time.


UI Reference Table
------------------

This is a table of all button mappings in Anduril, in one place:

Mode		UI	Button	Action
----		--	------	------
Off		Any	1C	On (ramp mode, memorized level)
Off		Any	1H	On (ramp mode, floor level)
Off		Any	2C	On (ramp mode, ceiling level)
Off		Simple	2H	On (momentary ceiling level)
Off		Full	2H	On (momentary turbo)
Off		Any	3C	Battcheck mode
Off		Full	3H	Strobe mode (whichever was used last)
Off		Any	4C	Lockout mode
Off		Full	5C	Momentary mode
Off		Full	7C	Aux LEDs: Next pattern
Off		Full	7H	Aux LEDs: Next color
Off		Full	10C	Enable Simple UI
Off		Simple	10H	Disable Simple UI
Off		Full	10H	Simple UI ramp config menu (1: floor, 2: ceiling, [3: steps])
Off		Any	13H	Factory reset (on some lights)
Off		Any	15+C	Version check

Ramp		Any	1C	Off
Ramp		Any	1H	Ramp (up, with reversing)
Ramp		Any	2H	Ramp (down)
Ramp		Simple	2C	Go to/from ceiling
Ramp		Full	2C	Go to/from ceiling (or turbo if at ceil already)
Ramp		Full	3C	Change ramp style (smooth / stepped)
Ramp		Any	3H	Tint ramping (on some lights)
Ramp		Full	3H	Momentary turbo (on lights without tint ramping)
Ramp		Any	4C	Lockout mode
Ramp		Full	5C	Momentary mode
Ramp		Full	5H	Sunset timer on, and add 5 minutes
Ramp		Full	7H	Ramp config menu (1: floor, 2: ceiling, [3: steps])
Ramp		Full	10C	Turn on manual memory and save current brightness
Ramp		Full	10H	Manual memory config menu (1: off, 2: set timeout)

Lockout		Any	1C/1H	Momentary moon (lowest floor)
Lockout		Any	2C/2H	Momentary moon (highest floor, or manual mem level)
Lockout		Any	4C	On (ramp mode, memorized level)
Lockout		Any	4H	On (ramp mode, floor level)
Lockout		Any	5C	On (ramp mode, ceiling level)
Lockout		Full	7C	Aux LEDs: Next pattern
Lockout		Full	7H	Aux LEDs: Next color
Lockout		Full	10H	Auto-lock config menu (1: set timeout)

Strobe (any)	Full	1C	Off
Strobe (any)	Full	2C	Next strobe mode
Strobe (any)	Full	3H	Tint ramping (on some lights)
Strobe (any)	Full	5C	Momentary mode (using current strobe)

Candle		Full	1H/2H	Brighter / dimmer
Candle		Full	5H	Sunset timer on, add 5 minutes
Party strobe	Full	1H/2H	Faster / slower
Tactical strobe	Full	1H/2H	Faster / slower
Biking		Full	1H/2H	Brighter / dimmer
Lightning	Full	1H	Interrupt current flash or start new one

Batt check	Any	1C	Off
Batt check	Full	2C	Next blinky mode (Temp check, Beacon, SOS)
Batt check	Full	7H	Voltage config menu

Temp check	Full	1C	Off
Temp check	Full	2C	Next blinky mode (Beacon, SOS, Batt check)
Temp check	Full	7H	Thermal config menu

Beacon		Full	1C	Off
Beacon		Full	1H	Configure beacon timing
Beacon		Full	2C	Next blinky mode (SOS, Batt check, Temp check)

SOS		Full	1C	Off
SOS		Full	2C	Next blinky mode (Batt check, Temp check, Beacon)

Momentary	Full	Any	On (until button is released)
Momentary	Full	Disconnect power	Exit Momentary mode

Config menus	Full	Hold	Skip current item with no changes
Config menus	Full	Release	Configure current item

Number entry	Full	Click	Add 1 to value for current item
